.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" (C) Copyright 2000-2021 Heinz Kredel <kredel@rz.uni-mannheim.de>,
.\" $Id$
.\"
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH JAS 1 "January  4, 2018"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
jas \- program to interactively use the Java Algebra System (JAS) from Jython or JRuby. 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B jas
.RI [ -py | -jy | -rb | -jr ] [ -d ] [ -v ] [ -h | --help ] [ -- ] " files" ...
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B jas
command.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.
\fBjas\fP is a program that runs an interpreter to access the JAS library.
The interface to JAS provides Sage like scripting constructions to define 
polynomial rings, construct polynomials and use various operations from 
commutative, solvable and non-commutative algebra on these objects.

The Java Algebra System (\fBJAS\fP) is an object oriented, type safe and
multi-threaded approach to computer algebra. JAS provides a well
designed software library using generic types for algebraic
computations implemented in the Java programming language using the
JVM runtime infrastructure. The library can be used as any other Java
software package or it can be used interactively or interpreted
through a jython (Java Python) or jruby (Java Ruby) front end, there
is also an Android App based on Ruboto (jruby for Android). The focus
of JAS is at the moment on commutative, solvable and non-commutative
polynomials, power series, Groebner bases, factorization, real and
complex roots and applications. By the use of Java as implementation
language JAS is 64-bit and multi-core CPU ready and can make use of
mutiple CPUs where available. JAS can run on a wide variety of devices
ranging from Android to compute clusters (using MPJ a Java Message
Passing Interface (MPI) or OpenMPI).

This programm \fBjas\fP will determine the JRuby or Jython environment 
and then call the requested script interpreter with all 
JAS related environment information (jar files, Java options etc).
.SH OPTIONS
These programs follow the usual GNU command line syntax, with long
options starting with two dashes (`-').
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
.B \-rb, \-jr
Use Ruby scripting with JRruby (this is the default).
.TP
.B \-py, \-jy 
Use Python scripting with Jython.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show summary of options.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose option for scripting language.
.TP
.B \-d
Debug this script.
.TP
.B \-\-
Pass remaining arguments through to Jython or JRuby.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR jython (1),
.BR jruby (1),
.BR Sage (1).

The \fBjas\fP program uses the JAS Jython and JRuby interfaces 
which are fully documented at the 
.br
URL 
.IR http://krum.rz.uni-mannheim.de/jas
